Those who use drugs should be automatically sentenced to time in prison

Today, we no longer fear any contagious diseases, kudos to modern technology and medical advancement. However, it is the contagious behaviors such as addiction and the wrong abuse of drugs that continue to terrorize our society, especially the young ones. It is undeniable that drug addiction is indeed on the rise and effective solutions must be taken in order to trim down the number of drug addicts. Some suggest that it would be better if those caught red-handed using drugs be imprisoned. In my opinion, I disagree to the aforementioned resolution due to the reasons that I will put forward below.
First of all, I do agree that some of the addicts do turn over a new leaf at the prison. Nevertheless, once they return to the society, they tend to relapse and get involved in drugs again. This is because, in the prisons, there would not be any programs or talks that can enlighten and transform them as well as change their perspectives towards drugs. As such, all the efforts of putting them behind bars are simply in vain. Instead, if the addicts are sent to rehabilitation centres, they will treated for their addiction. On top of that, counselors can provide them with counseling and motivation to help them build a new life.
On the other hand, some argue that if the drug addicts are not given intense punishment, they will not change and continue to misuse drugs. Nonetheless, I believe that this is mainly due to the society not accepting the prisoners as a part of them. If only the society or the people surrounding the addicts give them a second chance, I am sure that they will never abuse drugs once more. The support alone is not sufficient. They can also report to the concerned parties about any misuse of drugs at the residential areas. Thus, with more public awareness, drug abuse can be certainly be reduced and eventually brought to a halt without having to put the addicts into jail.
Everyone of us deserves a second chance in life. After all, we are human beings and we learn from our mistakes. Referring to the consequentalist theory, the society should allow leniency for people to experiment and learn, as long as it is on their own expenses. To put it in a nutshell, I believe that sending the drug addicts to rehabilitation centres acts as a beacon of hope for the affected individuals and is also a crucial step in helping them redeem their lives and rejuvenate their lost hopes for a better future rather than sending them to prison.
