Everyone Should Go Camping

Camping can take on many definitions. Camping to one person can mean seclusion in the middle of a forest. Another individual might think camping as a motor home with all the amenities of their house, including the kitchen sink. Whatever the definition is, camping is an experience that should be tried by everyone.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has posted on their website, http://www.epa.gov/iaq/pubs/insidest.html, that approximately 90% of a person's life is spent indoors. The same article goes on to state "In the last several years, a growing body of scientific evidence has indicated that the air within homes and other buildings can be more seriously polluted than the outdoor air in even the largest and most industrialized cities." Spending time camping is a great way to revitalize the lungs. The phrase "city air" often is thought as air that is polluted, while "country air" is often used to describe clean, healthy air. Breathing the country air usually makes a person feel revitalized. There is no better way to receive the country air than while camping.
Another great part about camping is being outside under the sun. The sun rays help the human body with the production of vitamin D. In fact, other than popping a vitamin pill, the only way that a body can produce vitamin D is through the exposure to the sun. Feeling the warm rays of the sun hit the face is always a welcome sensation. Being outside in the sun is another great advantage of camping.
With the recent downturn of the economy, people are always trying to find ways to have fun at a relative inexpensive cost. Camping is a great way to have fun while keeping the overall cost down. A one night stay at Sands of Time RV Park costs twenty two dollars a night. That fee includes water, sewer, and electric. A stay in a condo in the same area will cost at least $645.00 for the week. A condo will cost the family $491 more than a campsite. That difference in price can make a camping trip a good possibility while keeping the overall costs down to a minimum.
Camping gives anyone the possibility to go places that they have never been before. Camping can take you to Yosemite, or into the Band Lands of South Dakota. Camping can also take place at a nearby state park. No matter where the campsite is, a camper can feel miles away from the city. There are so many places both near and far that are best experienced by spending a few days within the place. Camping gives you the ability to see these beautiful locations at first sunlight, in the middle of the day, at sunset and even under the stars. It can be amazing how different the same object can look throughout the day.
Campers often express how a feeling comes over their body when they reach the moment when the day to day turmoil leaves their body. Virtually every camper experiences this moment. This is specifically when they are experiencing nature and the realization is made how much simpler life is when outside with nature. Returning to nature often allows campers to return to their true selves. It is this discovery that should be experienced by all.
The benefits of camping can also be seen in families. Some people that do not like the idea of camping give the reason of having to camp with people in such a confined space. It this confined space that, when allowed, can create a close bond between family members. When families go camping, they put the jobs and sporting events on hold. There are usually no video games being played, no soccer practice to drive to, and no business projects to worry about. By putting aside all of these events, the family has an opportunity to bond and renew their relationships. Some of this may be foreign to some people and there can be resistance. When this resistance is put aside, these bonds will be renewed. Camping is a great way to bring families together and strengthen their love.
Food is always a item that people cannot do without. Campers have an opportunity to try some interesting food. Cooking over a fire makes burgers and potatoes taste better than can be found at any fast food place. Campers need to think out their meals thoroughly prior to making a trip. These well planned meals are sometimes the best meals that campers have ever had. Cooking a chicken over campfire, cooking an apple pie in a dutch oven, and cooking a burger wrapped in foil on the coals of a camp fire can put the best gourmet chefs to shame. Perhaps it is the fresh smoke, the clean air or just the fact that a camper's senses are heightened. Whatever the reasons are, food always tastes better when camping.
Some of the people that can be met while camping can make the entire trip better. Campers can come from every state, and sometimes different countries. Taking a simple walk around the campsite, the camper can encounter these people and hear the most amazing stories. Campers are friendly and enjoy the company of fellow campers. Kids always seem to find new "best friends" for the weekends and even adults may find themselves sharing a meal with their new neighbors.
Sometimes camping can also make campers realize the overlooked luxuries that they experience day to day. Flush toilets, warm showers, central heating and air, and even the lack of bugs accompanying the sleeping camper are some of the luxuries that are missed the most. A small weekend away from these luxuries can make the campers realize how lucky they are in their day to day living.
Camping is one of the most basic and enjoyable activities that can be experienced by all. Camping has no requirements other than willing participants. Camping doesn't discriminate, doesn't have deadlines and has nothing but fun around each corner. No matter if the camping is experienced in a tent or in a luxury camper, getting outside, in the wilderness can provide a lifetime of memories. Camping has something for everyone.