Why you should Exercise

More than 1.6 billion people in the world are either overweight or obese and United States has the highest rate of obesity. America's number one killer is cardiovascular diseases, which can easily be prevented by exercising. Exercise not only reduces the risk of health problems and various diseases, but it also has an effect on overall appearance. It is proven that exercising and being active can improve self-esteem and confidence. Excerising is one of the most important things in life and it can even be fun. It is a crucial element for living a healthier, longer, and happier life. 
The number one reason why people should exercise is because it will keep you healthy. Americans are eating enormous amounts of fast foods these days, so cardiovascular diseases are becoming more and more common. One out of every four Americans are suffering from some form of cardiovascular diseases, which results in more than forty-five percent of deaths annually. The main cause for this condition is obesity. The more body fat that you have, the greater your risk for heart disease. However, this condition can easily be prevented or controlled by exercising. Exercising makes the heart muscles stronger. When your heart muscle is strong it can do the same amount of work at a lower heart rate, so the heart doesn't have to work as hard as it does with weak muscles. In today's society people are less concerned with the food they eat and their physical condition, so many serious illnesses are becoming quite common. Exercising not only helps prevent cardiovascular diseases, but it also helps prevent strokes, type 2 diabetes, and even certain types of cancer. 
The second benefit to exercising is that it improves self-esteem and confidence. Most people think of exercising as only being a physical activity, but it's also a mental activity. There have been studies that show evidence that people who exercise have higher self esteem and confidence. It also showed that active people are less likely to have depression and anxiety. Exercising gives people energy, which helps people have positive outlooks on life and it helps relieves tension and stress. When you exercise you body releases endorphins, which are chemicals that create a happy feeling in brain. Plus, when you're exercising you're bringing more oxygen into you lungs and your brain appreciates the extra air. Exercising also helps improve you brain function and your memory.
In my opinion the best reason to exercise is that it's really fun! Most people think that exercising takes up a lot of time and it requires too much work. When people actually take the time to try exercising they realize it's an enjoyable experience. It doesn't matter how you exercise, as long as you are being active. Everyone enjoys different sports or activities, so it's important to figure out which is best for you. When you having fun you don't even realize that your exercising and you look forward to it everyday. Setting goals and rewards will help you stay motivated and consistent with exercising. There is no greater feeling than achieving a weight lose goal and being able to feel good about your body. It makes exercising well worth it.
In conclusion, exercising is the key to making your life healthier, longer, and happier. It is one of the most important things in life and it's one hundred percent beneficial. Many people come up with plenty of excuses to not exercise; however, if you truly want to improve your mental and physical health you will find the energy and time to exercise. Everyone should take time out of their days to exercise, so they can improve their lives in many ways. So next time you are deciding whether or not to exercise just think of the benefits you will experience from it. It is extremely rewarding and worthwhile.