Can petrol price increase impact on reducing traffic and pollution?

Nowadays, the importance of vehicles has been widely recognized thoughout the world. However, it rises concerns about the increasingly severe traffic problems as well as the automobile exhaust pollution. Some argue that the best solution to these issues is raising the price of petrol. From my perspective, I think their view is overly simplistic.
Undeniably, making the fuel cost more money could limit the number of vehicles to some extent. Due to the increasing number of petrol stations, the competition in this field is more and more fierce, thus the price of petrol could be lower in the future. Therefore, those who are suffering from the inefficiency of public transport tend to own a car immediately. Moreover, some families purchase even more than three cars just for their own sake. In such case if they must pay more money on fuel, they may consider about that price of purchasing additionally for more time.
Nevertheless, such an argument may restrict the real necessity of automobiles. In fact, some families really need one or two cars. For example, three family members have to work or study in three place separated so far with each other, then they need to acquire at least two cars or they may both be late. On the other hand, the development of automobile industry could be restrained as well as the employments offered by it, which could have negative effects on economy. Therefore, I can hardly agree that the solution is the best.
From my mind, I think there are three ways tosolve these problems. Firstly, a new method of expenditure classification could be adopted. For instance, individuals had to pay much more for fuel if they possess more than three vehicles; secondly, the government should develop the public transport to meet the residents' demand; last but not least, the people should be encouraged to use electric car to reduce the car emissions.
To conclude, I personally believe the government should take some actions such as classifying the payment, boosting the public transport and encouraging individuals to adopt the zero-emission cars, rather than raising the price of petrol, to get rid of the traffic and pollution problems.
