Technology cannot solve all the world's problems!

In our modern times, with the development of science and technology, our living standard has been improved beyond recognition. Technology, however, is not the best solution to all the world's intricate problems. Accordingly, it is believed that we need to place less emphasis on technological solutions and more on other values, such as economy, politics and education. Personally, I partly disagree with this point of view, and the reasons are given below.
To begin with, it should be borne in mind that technology plays an integral part in our lives. With the invention of computers and the Internet, we now can get easy access to all kinds of information. In addition, hi-tech devices also have a very positive impact on many aspects of our lives. They help us to work and study more efficiently, thus leading to an improvement in our abilities. Medical advances can improve our health and cure many fatal diseases. Besides, modern technology enables us to predict natural disasters much faster and more accurately, so we can reduce the number of deaths and property damage.
However, there are some serious problems springing from modern technology. First, deadly and powerful weapons can be a huge threat to the world's peace. Second, a lot of people spend too much time using hi-tech devices nowadays. They abuse them so severely that they feel they can hardly live without them. This can have a detrimental effect on their health, since they are likely to develop many dangerous diseases, including obesity, heart attack and high blood-pressure.
In conclusion, although there is no disputing the fact that technology is very crucial for our lives, in can also result in several negative drawbacks. However, I strongly believe that its advantages clearly outweigh its disadvantages, and that it can contribute greatly to the development of the world. Therefore, scientists should not place less emphasis on technological solutions, but try to pay more attention to develop new technologies instead.