Cross-Strait relations or Taiwan-China relations, Mainland–Taiwan relations are the relations between the following two political entities, which are separated by the Taiwan Strait in the west Pacific Ocean:
the  People's Republic of China, abbreviated as PRC, commonly known as "China", and
the  Republic of China, abbreviated as ROC, commonly known as "Taiwan".
In 1949, with the Chinese Civil War turning decisively in favour of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Republic of China (ROC) government led by the Kuomintang (KMT) retreated to Taiwan and established the provisional capital in Taipei, while the CPC proclaimed the People's Republic of China (PRC) government in Beijing.
Since then, the relations between the governments in Beijing and Taipei have been characterized by limited contact, tensions, and instability, due to the fact that the Civil War merely stopped without formal signing of any peace treaty and the two sides are technically still in a state of war. In the early years, military conflicts continued, while diplomatically both governments competed to be the "legitimate government of China". More recently, questions around the political and legal status of Taiwan have focused on the alternative prospects of political unification with mainland China or full Taiwanese independence. The People's Republic remains hostile to any formal declaration of independence and maintains its claim over Taiwan. At the same time, non-governmental and semi-governmental exchanges between the two sides have been increasing. From 2008, negotiations began to restore the "three links" (transportation, commerce, and communications) between the two sides, cut off since 1949. Party-to-party talks between the CPC and the KMT have resumed and semi-official negotiations through organizations representing the interests of their respective governments are being scheduled.
The English expression "cross-Strait relations" has been used by the two sides concerned and by many observers so that the relationship would not be referred to as "(Mainland) China–Taiwan relations" or "PRC–ROC relations". There is also no commonly used Chinese language phrase equivalent to the latter two phrases, although
Mainland–Taiwan relations is occasionally used by pro-China sources.
China–Taiwan relations is occasionally used by impartial observers and pro-independence sources.